# Localization Readme

## Also See

- NotePlan [[MMF - i18n]]

## Tips for Localizers

- Enter a linebreak in .stringsdict using option + enter. '\n' doesn't work.

## Reflection on Localization System - March 2024

Currently, MMF 3.0.1 is the latest release. The app has been translated into English, German, Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese. MMF 3.0.0 was released 2 months ago in December 2023. Shortly after, we created a new Localization Guide on GitHub. The guide is quite technical and instructs users to use git and edit .strings files manually. There's also the "State of Localization" comment under that guide, which shows a detailed automatic analysis of the current translations and which ones might be missing or outdated, etc.

So far, all of the translations, except for Vietnamese, were done in the Beta phase (of MMF of more than a year), and not in the over 2 months since release. Although the sales numbers for MMF 3 are 10x now compared to the beta, and although we've written the Localization Guide. (During the Beta, there were no instructions how to localize the app at all, so only programmers familiar with Xcode could do it.)

Also, there are some (admittedly pretty hidden, IIRC) places, where I've added new strings that haven't been updated for Korean and Chinese. These translations in need of update, are being shown in the "State of Localization", but nobody has reacted, yet.

I think we have to conclude from these things, that our current localization system is not very effective.

**Ideas for improvement**

Summary:

- The best possible solution would probably be custom, not crowdin-based. The most important things we should change is to autogenerate .xcloc files along with autogenerated screenshots produced by XCUI tests. Then have users edit the .xcloc files and send them to me via a github comment or email, instead of having users manually edit .strings files and make pull requests and so on.
  - Update: Actually, what I forgot to consider in my crowdin-vs-custom reflection, is that crowdin would also help translate the MMF website. The custom solution wouldn't work with that I think? I guess we could autogenerate xliff files for the website? Should reflect on this more.
- Other QOL improvements for translators: We should probably add a "Help Translating MMF" link into the app, and probably split the "State of Localization" up into one document per language. We might also share the "State of Localization" "as a PDF instead of the the GitHub comment? (Not sure why I wanted to do that?). Maybe we could show users a simple overview of the languages showing which languages need updates (or maybe a progress bar next to each language.) alongside a link to the detailed State of Localization for that language and maybe the xcloc file for that language. 
- I think the whole 'manually editing string files' workflow has practically no benefits for users at that point except if they want to feel like hackers. 
- From how I understand and have experienced Crowdin, it would be an almost strictly worse experience for users than this custom solution, except that it would allow inline discussions and voting, but those features don't seem to be used much on LinearMouse. 
- I thought about financial incentives but we decided they are probably not a good idea for now because it's just complicated to do that well and it wouldn't make sense to compensate users who only update a few translations quickly for a new release - and I feel like those incremental updates might be the most important / hardest thing to incentivize. Not sure though Overall: Maybe we can try to do financial incentives later, but first we should work on making translation experience better.

Detailed Reflection:

- Crowdin: 
    - LinearMouse uses crowdin.com (https://crowdin.com/project/linearmouse) and their translation seems to be very successful. I read somewhere that crowdin offers free services to open source projects. I think crowdin might be the simplest solution and lead to the best results, since the ease of use should drive peoples engagement.

- Custom implementation: 
    - Alternatively to crowdin, we could try to improve our custom translation system to be much more user friendly - especially for non-programmers. Ideas for streamlining the process:
    - Put a 'Help Translate' link in the app or other prominent places - to drive engagement which should improve translation quality.
    - Make the localization guide as short, scannable, and non-technical as possible. Make the workflow based on autogenerated .xcloc file. Just tell users. "Download this file, update the translations with Xcode or some other nice app, then write a comment below and attach the file. Finally you'll get credit in Acknowledgements/UpdateNotes. Thanks!". Then maybe have an overview of the languages. For each language we can show how many percent translated it is, and also provide a link to download the "State of Localization" for that language as a nice PDF. Maybe we can also let people download an .xcloc file just for that language or sth.
    - If we do it like this, the experience should be much nicer and I'm sure there will be more engagement. However compared to crowdin (as far as I understand that) our custom solution still would differ in these important ways:
        - Custom solution vs Crowdin:
        - Crowdin might not provide all the detailed automatic analysis info from our State of Localization. However it provides other context info such as comments, history of what the translation value was, votes on the translations values, seeing AI generated suggestions inline. Users being able to request addition context information, and more. 
        - Experience with Crowdin:
            - I just improved some translations for LinearMouse using crowdin and I didn't like the experience that much. I was quite overwhelmed by the interface. (My brain feels cloudy so maybe it's me). There was approval rating stuff but all the languages were 0% approved? I even approved some stuff but approval ratings didn't go up? There were all these cost of translation calculators on the LinearMouse project? There's so many different tabs and submenus. When you enter a translation, the whole screen shifts to the next translation. Theres's a vote and a translate view for a language, but also a combined view for both that looks almost the same as the translate view? It was so confusing. Then I entered some translations and there was like zero feedback? I wondered 'how do I send this now'. But I think it was already sent. I just don't understand, how or if, I'll be credited and how this all works. 
            - Also, the commenting feature (Which I thought would be the killer feature for crowdin) wasn't much used at all from what I saw. Mostly it was just one dude translating most things in a .strings file without discussion or or revisions. However, I did see requests for screenshots in some places.
            - Overall, I think editing an .xcloc file and then uploading it is actually a much simpler experience than crowdin, which I didn't expect! It seems most of the 'crowd' features like comments and votes aren't that impactful because at the end of the day it's a few people taking responsiblity and doing the work. The main advantage I see for crowdin is that people can request context, which would make it easier for me to provide good context. Another possible advantage would be that it would be less work than a custom solution, but the whole current localization system took me like 1 or 2 weeks and was really fun and fast to write in Python even though it's very complex. So I think the time investment isn't a huge factor. Also, I just noticed that you can use `xcodebuild -includeScreenshots` together with XCUI test that produce screenshots to autogenerate screenshots! I think that makes a custom solution clearly the better choice in every way! Except perhaps when it comes to how much effort it is for us. 
            
- Financial incentives: 
    - We might give out bounties or other form of payments to translators. I think it would be financially totally sensible to give translators of some languages like Chinese a few hundred bucks. But if we give $300 to translators of all of the hundreds of other languages that barely drive any revenue, that's not really financially sensible I think. We could do different prices for different languages or do language bounties but that's so complicated..? Idk I don't like it. Might have to think about it more. But the biggest problem is that a lot of the work we want to incetivise people to do is maintenance. Updating outdated translations and so on. And that work would only be worth a few bucks financially. So I don't think anyone wants to send me their bank data or paypal for like 5 bucks? And if the initial translators get a few hundred bucks but then maintainers get nothing, that's also weird? I just don't like it. Overall, I think based on this thought process, money isn't a great incentive. I also think people want to translate stuff they like - even without financial compensation. Case in point LinearMouse. I think it just needs to be something people want to do. Make it easy, fun, engaging, whatever, but I don't think getting money involved is a good idea. At least not before we tried making the translation experience much better.

## .xcloc files

.xcloc files make it much easier for non-programmers to translate Mac Mouse Fix.

- See the main documentation here: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/exporting-localizations/
- See documentation on including screenshots in .xcloc files: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/creating-screenshots-of-your-app-for-localizers

- Go to **Xcode > Product > Export Localizations...** to get an .xcloc file. You can also generate from the command line with **xcodebuild -exportLocalizations** and include screenshots generated from **XCUI** tests using the **-includeScreenshots** argument. See the main documentation for that. 
- Make sure the Xcode build flag **Compiler to Extract Swift Strings** (aka SWIFT_EMIT_LOC_STRINGS) is set to YES so that the extracting works properly for swift (src: main documentation)

## Memory helpers

- Don't change the keys for NSLocalizedString()! Otherwise all the existing translations for the key don't work anymore.
- Building the App or the Helper executes the Localization/Code/UpdateStrings script. It orders the key-value-pairs and brings the comments up-to-date.
- To test layout
    - In build scheme, set argument `-NSConstraintBasedLayoutVisualizeMutuallyExclusiveConstraints YES`
    - In build scheme set pseudo language (e.g. double length)
- NSLocalizedString() convention: Example: `NSLocalizedString("enabled-toggle.hint", comment: "First draft: Mac Mouse Fix will stay enabled after you close it || Note: Some useful note")`

## Notes

TODO: We're using `en` as language ID for English and `de` as language ID for German. It might be be better to use `en-US` and `de-DE`? Because that's more accurate and clear if ppl add regional variants such as `de-CH`? We're also using `en-US` and `de-DE` as identifiers on the mmf website and the `markdown_generator.py`. Update: We changed all German translations to lang code `de`, so it shows up neatly in State of Localization. For English it's not important that all the language IDs match since it's the development language and doesn't show up in the State of Localization anyways. 

## Basic Localization Guide

- https://medium.com/@mds6058/localization-in-ios-and-how-to-make-it-not-suck-3adcbc3ec08f
- Covers all the (confusing) basics and setup
- Barty crouch: 
    - https://github.com/Flinesoft/BartyCrouch
    - Autogenerates and updates `.strings` files. Super handy!
    - Also supports machine translation, and other cool stuff
    - Update: We built our own script to replace bartycrouch in Localization/Code

## Auto-translate menu items

- 1. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4206008/avoid-translating-standard-menus-items-in-xcode-project
    - No good answers
    - https://github.com/core-code/MiscApps/tree/master/Translator
        - "Use at your own risk"
- 2. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11784716/localizing-the-edit-menu-and-other-standard-menus
    - Localization using Apple Glossaries: https://douglashill.co/localisation-using-apples-glossaries/
        - Is a lot of hacky effort
- 3. Maybe I could use Barty Crouch machine translations as a base and then just do the rest by hand
    - It uses Azure Translation. Should be free or extremely cheap but is a bit of work to set up. 

Conclusion: Didn't end up doing this.
