<!-- THIS FILE IS AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED - EDITS WILL BE OVERRIDDEN -->

<!-- Based off this GH Discussions comment: https://github.com/noah-nuebling/mac-mouse-fix/discussions/743#discussioncomment-7938922 -->

Hey guys, thanks for reaching out and for the nice words!

I'll address your questions and concerns below:

## What's new in MMF 3

There are many changes in MMF 3 compared to 2. Some of the most important are:

- **Click and Drag to Scroll & Navigate**

   You can now click and drag to simulate swiping with 2 fingers on an Apple trackpad. This lets you breeze through the system as it allows you to scroll really precisely and flexibly in 360°, go back and forward in Safari, delete mails quickly and much more.

   You can even use [Swish](https://highlyopinionated.co/swish/) right from your mouse. It's a really nice app that's designed to let you manage your windows with a simple swipe on your trackpad. But now, you can use it from your mouse, too! - Anything you can do by swiping on a trackpad works just as well with Mac Mouse Fix.

- **Click and Scroll Gestures**

  You can now hold a mouse button and then scroll to trigger many different actions, such as opening Launchpad, zooming in or out, and much more. It feels super responsive and fluid, just like a trackpad.

- **Totally rewritten the scrolling**

   Scrolling now requires less effort and feels much smoother and more fun to use. It can also simulate swiping on a trackpad. This brings some small niceties such as a little bounce when you reach the end of a page, being able to go back and forward in Safari by scrolling horizontally, better compatibility with Preview.app, and more.

- **Awesome new UI** 

  The apps UI is also completely rewritten to be more beautiful, powerful and intuitive. It can also be translated into other languages now and it's already available in Chinese, Korean, and German.

- **Menubar Item**

  There's now a menubar item that you can enable if you like which lets you see when Mac Mouse Fix is active, and it looks sleek.

- **Do everything you do on a Trackpad**

  If you're using a 3-button mouse, I think the biggest difference between MMF 2 and MMF 3 in your daily experience will be the scrolling. But if you use a 5-button mouse, I think MMF 3 is quite transformative, because it really lets you do anything you can do on a trackpad with simple and intuitive gestures on your mouse. For example, Click and Scroll to *Zoom in or out*, Click and Drag to go *Back and Forward* in Safari, and much more.

For an overview of the new trackpad-like gestures in MMF 3 (including Video Demos), see the [trackpad section](https://macmousefix.com/#trackpad) on the website. There's also a [scrolling section](https://macmousefix.com/#scroll), which shows the new, smoother and easier scrolling. But I think it's best to just try it out yourself.

To see a more detailed log of all the changes you can view the release notes of MMF [3.0.0 Beta 7](https://github.com/noah-nuebling/mac-mouse-fix/releases/tag/3.0.0-Beta-7) and the previous Betas.

## How to Restore Your Settings After You Go Back to Mac Mouse Fix 2

If you update from MMF 2 to MMF 3, your current settings will be deleted. 
However, there's a way to **save** and **restore** the settings, after you go back to MMF 2:

1. Open the 'More...' screen in MMF 2, then click the MMF logo in the top left while holding Command (⌘) and Shift (⇧) on your keyboard. This will reveal a file called 'config.plist' in the Finder. This file contains all your settings.
2. Save a copy of 'config.plist', to restore later
3. Update to MMF 3 and use it as you wish
4. If you want to go back to MMF 2, just download it again, then reveal 'config.plist' in Finder and replace it with the copy you made earlier.\
   *If MMF 2 doesn't enable after going back to it, you might have to delete MMF 3, then empty the trash, and then restart your computer.*

---

I hope this helps you make a decision whether you want to check out MMF 3, and gives you peace of mind about going back to MMF 2 in case you'd like to!

Let me know if you have more thoughts or questions to share.