Also check out the **neat improvements** introduced in [3.0.0 Beta 6](https://github.com/noah-nuebling/mac-mouse-fix/releases/tag/3.0.0-Beta-6)!


---

**3.0.0 Beta 7** brings several small improvements and bug fixes. 

Here's everything new:

**Improvements**

- Added **Korean translations**. Big thanks to @jeongtae! (Find him on [GitHub](https://github.com/jeongtae))
- Made **scrolling** with the 'Smoothness: High' option **even smoother**, by only changing the speed gradually, instead of having sudden jumps in the scrolling speed as you move the scroll wheel. This should make scrolling feel a little smoother and easier to follow with your eyes without making things less responsive. Scrolling with 'Smoothness: High' uses around 30% more CPU now, on my computer it went from 1.2% CPU usage when continuously scrolling to 1.6%. So scrolling is still highly efficient and I hope this won't make a difference to anyone. Big thanks to [MOS](https://mos.caldis.me/), which inspired this feature and whose 'Scroll Monitor' I used to help implement the feature.
- Mac Mouse Fix is now **handling button inputs from all sources**. Before, Mac Mouse Fix would only handle inputs from mice that it recognized. I think this might help compatibility with certain mice in edge cases, like when using a Hackintosh, but it will also lead Mac Mouse Fix to pick up artificially generated button inputs from other apps, which might lead to problems in other edge cases. Let me know if this leads to any problems for you, and I will address that in future updates.
- Refined the feel and polish of the 'Click and Scroll' for 'Desktop & Launchpad' and 'Click and Scroll' to 'Move Between Spaces' gestures.
- Now taking the information density of a language into account when calculating the **time that notifications are shown for**.  Before this, notifications would only stay visible for a very short amount of time in languages with high information density like Chinese or Korean.
- Enabled **different gestures** to move between **Spaces**, open **Mission Control**, or open **App Exposé**. In Beta 6, I made it so these actions were only available through the 'Click and Drag' gesture - as an experiment to see how many people actually cared about being able to access those actions in other ways. It seems that some do, so now I made it possible again to access these actions through a simple 'Click' of a button or through 'Click and Scroll'.
- Made it possible to **Rotate** through a **Click and Scroll** gesture.
- **Improved** the way that the **Trackpad Simulation** option works in some scenarios. For example when scrolling horizontally to delete a message in Mail, the direction that the message moves is now inverted, which I hope feels a bit more natural and consistent to most people.
- Added a feature to **remap** to **Primary Click** or **Secondary Click**. I implemented this because the right mouse button on my favorite mouse broke. These options are hidden by default. You can see them by holding the Option key while selecting an action. 
  - This is currently lacking translations for Chinese and Korean, so if you would like to contribute translations for these features that would be greatly appreciated!

**Bug Fixes**

- Fixed a bug where the **direction of 'Click and Drag'** for 'Mission Control & Spaces' was **inverted** for people who have never toggled the 'Natural scrolling' option in System Settings. Now, the direction of 'Click and Drag' gestures in Mac Mouse Fix should always match the direction of gestures on your Trackpad or Magic Mouse. If you want a separate option for inverting the 'Click and Drag' direction, instead of having it follow the System Settings, let me know.
- Fixed a bug where the **free days** would **count up too quickly** for some users. If you were affected by this, let me know and I'll see what I can do.
- Fixed an issue under macOS Sonoma where the tab bar wouldn't display properly.
- Fixed jankiness when using 'macOS' scrolling speed while using 'Click and Scroll' to open Launchpad.
- Fixed crash where the 'Mac Mouse Fix Helper' app (which runs in the background when Mac Mouse Fix is enabled) would crash sometimes when recording a keyboard shortcut.
- Fixed a bug where Mac Mouse Fix would crash when trying to pick up artificial events generated by [MiddleClick-Sonoma](https://github.com/artginzburg/MiddleClick-Sonoma)
- Fixed an issue where the name for some mice displayed in the 'Restore Defaults...' dialog would contain the manufacturer twice. 
- Made it less likely for 'Click and Drag' for 'Mission Control & Spaces' to get stuck when the computer is slow. 
- Corrected use of 'Force Touch' in UI strings where it should be 'Force click'.
- Fixed a bug that would occur for certain configurations, where opening Launchpad or showing the Desktop through 'Click and Scroll' wouldn't work if you released the button while the transition animation was still ongoing.


**More**

- Several under-the-hood improvements, stability improvements, under-the-hood cleanup, and more.

## How You Can Help

You can help by sharing your **ideas**, **issues** and **feedback**!

The best place to share your **ideas** and **issues** is the [Feedback Assistant](https://noah-nuebling.github.io/mac-mouse-fix-feedback-assistant/?type=bug-report).
The best place to give **quick** unstructured feedback is the [Feedback Discussion](https://github.com/noah-nuebling/mac-mouse-fix/discussions/366).

You can also access these places from within the app on the '**ⓘ About**' tab.

**Thanks** for helping to make Mac Mouse Fix better! 😎:)